Problems at the Retrieval Level
At the retrieval level, students are required to cope with questions that are very close to what they have already
solved many times. They have to identify the problem, retrieve a close solution from memory, and adapt it to the
given case. Figure 2 is an example of a question at the retrieval level.
Figure 2 shows a mass m placed on a table. Draw arrows that show all the forces acting on the mass m.
We can assume that the students have already solved many questions asking them to mark the gravity force
and normal force acting on bodies and show that ΣF = 0. Therefore, they can answer the question in Figure 2 easily.

Problems at the Diagnosis Level
At the diagnosis level, students are required to cope with questions that are close to ones they already know
but include certain changes, such as the way the question is presented, existing data, or required problem-solving
processes. Figure 3 presents an example question to calculate the acceleration of a body moving on an inclined
plane with no friction.
Figure 3 shows a mass m that moves on an inclined plane under the force F. Calculate the acceleration of the 
In the question presented in Figure 3, a student must calculate the gravity force FG acting on mass m, the force
F1 acting opposite F, the equivalent force FT = F-F1, and the mass acceleration α = FT/m. Students often encounter
questions similar to this example in physics class, homework, or textbooks. In each case, they must diagnose the
system structure, identify the given parameters such as masses and forces existing in the system, and apply a
sequence of steps to solve the problem.


Problems at the Strategy Level
At the strategy level, the student must process complex relationships by making a decision about finding a
solution, such as a verbal solution, a graphical presentation of the solution, or a presentation using an algebraic
calculation. Sometimes the student must choose a method to solve the problem, for example, dividing the solution
into stages, dividing a subsystem into its components, radicalizing, or comparing with a borderline value.
Following is an example of a question at the strategy level.
Figure 4 shows a mass M1=1 Kg that slides on an inclined plane of angle α =17O. The mass is connected to a
cord that passes over a pulley and carries a number of weights. The mass of a single weight is 100 g. The coefficient
of static friction between the box and the surface is us = 0.35. The mass of the cord is negligible. Find the number
of weights to be hung on the wire so that the box will not start moving up or down the slope.
To solve the problem presented in Figure 4, a student must identify all forces operating in the system, break
down the forces on the mass M1, find an expression for the equivalent force, and draw the answer. The learner must
identify that the mass can move either up or down and analyze the forces acting on the system in each case. Because
the learner is required to make a decision in a series of stages to solve the problem, the problem is ranked at the
strategy level on the PPST scale.

Problems at the Conceptual Level
In a problem at the conceptual level, a learner is required to solve a problem by explicit reference to one or
several physical principles, as demonstrated in the following example, Figure 5.
Figure 5 shows a trolley moving to the right. A cord with a weight is attached to the ceiling of the trolley. The
graph shows the trolley’s velocity versus time. Explain in which section, or sections A, B, C, the weight deviates to
the left side.
Solving the question presented in Figure 5 requires the learner to analyze a compound system composed of the
trolley and the weight (a pendulum) and understand the cases of velocity and acceleration the graph shows. A
learner can answer the question only by relying on physics principles in kinematics (motion properties: position,
velocity, acceleration) dynamics (the rules according to which a body moves in these forms). This example
demonstrates the frequent case of a qualitative question that students can answer only if they understand physics
concepts well and can integrate a number of concepts into answering the question. Solving a problem on the
Conceptual level in PPST is required for a learner to suggest a solution on the Relational level according to the
SOLO taxonomy mentioned above. At this level, the learner has to address and integrate a range of aspects related
to the problem to come to a deeper and more coherent understanding of the whole.
Since ranking or creating physics questions at the conceptual level is often a challenge for teachers, we show
below a second example of a physics question at this level on the subject of electricity and magnetism (from the
physics Bagrut exam, 2009).
Figure 6 shows a rod PS with mass m located on an electronic scale calibrated in Newton units. Above it hangs
in parallel a pole RQ held in place. The length of each rod is L.
A constant current of I Ampere flows in rod RQ and a constant current of I1 Ampere flows in rod PS.
The scale shows N1 so N1<mg.
a. Draw a diagram of the forces acting on rod PS.
b. The direction of the current in the rod PS is from P to S. What is the direction of the current that passes
through the RQ rod: from R to Q or from Q to R? Explain your answer.
c. Write an expression for calculating the distance d between the two rods using the parameters I, I1, m, L
and N1. Use physical constants, if needed.
d. It is given that I1 > 4I.
Point A is in the plane of the rods, and the magnetic field strength at this point is zero.
(1) Is point A between the PS and RQ rods above the rod RQ or under the rod PS? Explain your answer.
(2) Express the distance between point A and RQ by d.
e. The rod PS is replaced by a magnetized rod (with similar dimensions). Can the RQ conductor rod, through
which a current flows, exert force on the permanent magnet? Explain your answer.
Items a and b in the question relating to Figure 6 could be ranked at the diagnosis level because students often
cope with similar questions in learning the mechanics chapter in physics. Items c, d and e, however, are on the
conceptual level because students must understand profoundly the electromagnetic phenomena relating to a wire
carrying current and the interaction between a pair of wires carrying current. A student might remember that two
wires carrying a current in the same direction attract each other, but this will not be enough for him/her to solve
these questions.


Problems at the Creative-Thinking Level
Some problems require a student to invent a completely new solution—a path he or she has not encountered in
the past. This might entail applying laws from other fields in a new way or using knowledge learned in one topic
to solve a problem in another topic and in a new way. The following example, Figure 7, demonstrates questions at
In the system shown in Figure 7, at time t = 0, ball A is thrown vertically up from a 45-meter building at a speed
of 45 m/s. Ball B is thrown vertically up from the bottom of the building at a speed of 55 m/s. Arrows YA and YB
indicate the axis the movement of each ball.
1. Find the acceleration of ball A in reference to axis YB.
2. Find the initial velocity of ball A in reference to axis YB.
3. Draw a graph of the position of ball A in reference to axis YB versus time until the tine the two balls pass by
each other.
The question in Figure 7 corresponds to the creative-thinking level because it is very unusual to analyze the
acceleration, speed, and distance of a body in reference to another one. The student must develop a solution and
draw a graph new for him or her. Questions of this sort appear frequently in science competitions for excellent
students but less often in regular science classes in schools.
In summary, the examples presented in this section demonstrate that the PPST can help identify or design
problems at different difficulty levels for the physics class. The PPST is unique in that a level assigned to a specific
problem or question relates to learners’ previous experiences solving similar problems. The more experienced the
learner is in solving similar problems, the lower the task or question ranks on the PPST. Consequently, the PPST
can rank the same question low for one class and high for another.
